DOCSP-9566 crud insert (#77)
mongodb/docs-java: source/fundamentals/crud/write-operations/insert.txt

=================
Insert Operations
=================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 1
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you will learn how to insert documents into MongoDB. 

You can use MongoDB to retrieve, update and delete information. To
perform any of those operations, that information, such as user profiles
and orders, needs to exist in MongoDB. For that information to exist,
you need to first perform an insert operation.

An insert operation inserts a single or multiple documents in MongoDB
using the  ``insertOne()``, ``insertMany()`` and ``bulkWrite()``
methods. 

The following sections focus on ``insertOne()`` and
``insertMany()``. For information on how to use the ``bulkWrite()``
method, see our ``Bulk Operations <TODO>`` page. 

Insert a Single Document
------------------------

> When you want to insert a single document, use the ``insertOne()``
> method. If the insertion is successful,  the method returns an

Reviewer: I think this can be reworded to use imperative mood and make it feel a touch more authoritative. Consider if someone search "insert a document into mongodb", which would immediately answer their question?
> When you want to insert a single document, use the ``insertOne()`` method.
vs
> Use the ``insertOne()`` method when you want to insert a single document.

```suggestion
Use the ``insertOne`` method when you want to insert a single document. If the insertion is successful,  the method returns an
```

Reviewer: I wonder if we can add more flavor about the method here rather than immediately jumping into what it returns. The information in the note about automagic `_id` may fit well here? Is there any other behavior we should state? Can it error? How?

``InsertOneResult`` instance representing the ``_id`` of the new
document. 

.. note::

   If you omit the ``_id`` field, the driver automatically generates a
   unique ``_id`` before inserting the document.

   A unique ``_id`` should look something like this:

   .. code-block:: json
      :copyable: false

      "_id": { "$oid": "60905ef9865e2105ceb7f7b8" }

Example
~~~~~~~

The following example creates and inserts a document using the
``insertOne()`` method: 

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Insert.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin insertOneExample
   :end-before: end insertOneExample

Your output should look something like this:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

   Inserted a document with the following id: 1

Insert Multiple Documents
-------------------------

When you want to insert multiple documents, use the ``insertMany()``

> method. If the insertion is successful,  the method returns an

Reviewer: Tacking on to my comment above, can we add more info? The info about `_id` seems like it should go here rather than in a note after talking about the return. What happens if it errors? Will it write all but the documents with errors?

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

   Inserted documents with the following ids: [1, 2]  

Summary
-------

There are three ways to perform an insert operation, but we focused on two:

- The ``insertOne()`` method inserts a single document.
- The ``insertMany()`` method inserts multiple documents.

External Resources
------------------

For additional information on the classes and methods mentioned on this
page, see the following resources: 

API Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- :java-sync-api:`insertOne() <com/mongodb/client/MongoCollection.html#insertOne(TDocument)>` 
- :java-sync-api:`insertMany() <com/mongodb/client/MongoCollection.html#insertMany>`
- :java-docs:`InsertOneResult <apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/result/InsertOneResult.html>`
- :java-docs:`InsertManyResult <apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/result/InsertManyResult.html>`

Further Explanation From Our Manual
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- :manual:`insertOne() </reference/method/db.collection.insertOne/>`
- :manual:`insertMany() </reference/method/db.collection.insertMany/>`

Runnable Examples
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- :doc:`Insert a Document </usage-examples/insertOne>` 

> - :doc:`Insert Multiple Documents </usage-examples/insertMany>`

Reviewer: This is excellent. I wonder if we could add just a bit more info into the summary just to reinforce the information?

=================
Insert Operations
=================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 1
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you will learn how to insert documents into MongoDB. 

You can use MongoDB to retrieve, update and delete information. To
perform any of those operations, that information, such as user profiles
and orders, needs to exist in MongoDB. For that information to exist,
you need to first perform an insert operation.

An insert operation inserts a single or multiple documents in MongoDB
using the  ``insertOne()``, ``insertMany()`` and ``bulkWrite()``
methods. 

The following sections focus on ``insertOne()`` and
``insertMany()``. For information on how to use the ``bulkWrite()``
method, see our ``Bulk Operations <TODO>`` page. 

A Note About ``_id``
--------------------

> When inserting a document, you have the choice to include certain fields
> and values except for the ``_id`` field. By default, MongoDB makes the
> ``_id`` field our unique index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When inserting a document, MongoDB enforces one constraint on your documents by default. Each document *must* contain a unique ``_id`` field.
```

There are two ways to manage this field:

> - You can provide the same type for each ``_id``.
> - You can omit the field to let the driver automatically generate unique values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can manage this field yourself, ensuring each value you use is unique.
- You can let the driver automatically generate unique ObjectID values.
```

> Unless you have another way to guarantee a unique index, let the
> driver to automatically generate ``_id`` values. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unless you have provided strong guarantees for uniqueness, we recommend
you let the driver to automatically generate ``_id`` values. 
```

.. note::

   If you violate the unique index constraint, the insertion fails and a
   ``writeError`` occurs. 
 
Insert a Single Document
------------------------

Use the ``insertOne()`` method when you want to insert a single
document. 

If the insertion is successful, the method returns an
``InsertOneResult`` instance representing the ``_id`` of the new
document. 

Example
~~~~~~~

The following example creates and inserts a document using the
``insertOne()`` method: 

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Insert.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin insertOneExample
   :end-before: end insertOneExample

Your output should look something like this:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

   Inserted a document with the following id: 60930c39a982931c20ef6cd6

Insert Multiple Documents
-------------------------

Use the ``insertMany()`` method when you want to insert multiple
documents. This method inserts documents in the order specified until an

> exception occurs if any.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exception occurs, if any.
```

For example, assume you want to insert the following documents:

.. code-block:: json

   { "_id": 3, "color": "red", "qty": 5 }
   { "_id": 4, "color": "purple", "qty": 10 }
   { "_id": 3, "color": "yellow", "qty": 3 }
   { "_id": 6, "color": "blue", "qty": 8 }

> If you attempt to insert these documents, a ``writeError`` occurs and
> the documents where the ``color`` is "red"  and "purple" are in your
> collection. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you attempt to insert these documents, a ``writeError`` occurs and
the documents prior to the error will be inserted into your collection. 
```

.. warning::

>    There is no acknowledgment for the documents that inserted before

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   There is no acknowledgment for the documents that are inserted before
```

Reviewer: did you verify this with Jeff/Ross?

Author: There's a thread pending their reply in the java channel, but I put this warning in for now more as a placeholder.  If there is an acknowledgement, I'll change this to a note with they way to do so.

Reviewer: Sounds good

You can use MongoDB to retrieve, update and delete information. To
perform any of those operations, that information, such as user profiles
and orders, needs to exist in MongoDB. For that information to exist,
you need to first perform an insert operation.

An insert operation inserts a single or multiple documents in MongoDB
using the  ``insertOne()``, ``insertMany()`` and ``bulkWrite()``
methods. 

The following sections focus on ``insertOne()`` and
``insertMany()``. For information on how to use the ``bulkWrite()``
method, see our ``Bulk Operations <TODO>`` page. 

A Note About ``_id``
--------------------

When inserting a document, MongoDB enforces one constraint on your
documents by default. Each document *must* contain a unique ``_id``
field. 

There are two ways to manage this field:

- You can manage this field yourself, ensuring each value you use is unique.
- You can let the driver automatically generate unique ObjectId values.

Unless you have provided strong guarantees for uniqueness, we recommend
you let the driver automatically generate ``_id`` values. 

.. note::

   Duplicate ``_id`` values violate unique index constraints, resulting

>    in a ``writeError``. 

Reviewer 2: Nit: `WriteError`

and orders, needs to exist in MongoDB. For that information to exist,
you need to first perform an insert operation.

An insert operation inserts a single or multiple documents in MongoDB
using the  ``insertOne()``, ``insertMany()`` and ``bulkWrite()``
methods. 

The following sections focus on ``insertOne()`` and
``insertMany()``. For information on how to use the ``bulkWrite()``
method, see our ``Bulk Operations <TODO>`` page. 

A Note About ``_id``
--------------------

When inserting a document, MongoDB enforces one constraint on your
documents by default. Each document *must* contain a unique ``_id``
field. 

There are two ways to manage this field:

- You can manage this field yourself, ensuring each value you use is unique.
- You can let the driver automatically generate unique ObjectId values.

Unless you have provided strong guarantees for uniqueness, we recommend
you let the driver to automatically generate ``_id`` values. 

.. note::

   If you violate the unique index constraint, the insertion fails and a
   ``writeError`` occurs. 
 
Insert a Single Document
------------------------

Use the ``insertOne()`` method when you want to insert a single
document. 

> If the insertion is successful, the method returns an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On successful insertion, the method returns an
```

.. code-block:: json

   { "_id": 3, "color": "red", "qty": 5 }
   { "_id": 4, "color": "purple", "qty": 10 }
   { "_id": 3, "color": "yellow", "qty": 3 }
   { "_id": 6, "color": "blue", "qty": 8 }

If you attempt to insert these documents, a ``writeError`` occurs at the
third document and the documents prior to the error get inserted into
your collection. 

.. note::

   Use a try-catch block to get an acknowledgment for successfully
   processed documents before the error occurs:

   .. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Insert.java
      :language: java
      :dedent:
      :start-after: begin insertManyErrorExample
      :end-before: end insertManyErrorExample

   The output consists of documents MongoDB can process and should look
   something like this:

   .. code-block:: 
      :copyable: false
      
      A MongoBulkWriteException occurred, but there are successfully processed 
      documents with the following ids: [3, 4, 6] 
   
   If you look inside your collection, you see the following documents:
   
   .. code-block:: json

      { "_id": 3, "color": "red", "qty": 5 }
      { "_id": 4, "color": "purple", "qty": 10 }

> If the insertion is successful, the method returns an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On successful insertion, the method returns an
```

> Overview

Reviewer 3: The page does not seem to contain a right-sidebar TOC. Could this be added?

--------

In this guide, you can learn how to insert documents into your MongoDB

> database. To insert a document, use insert operations.

Reviewer 3: Added as point 28 to[ writing hints and tips.](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1SxlDvx4MYKBE6-LYGp5i5uuHfY1ZUYYlhc6syEdta5M/edit)

> database. To insert a document, use insert operations.

Author: Is there a reason we bold? I checked in the style guide and there doesn't seem to be a rule on having to do this for terms to be defined.

> database. To insert a document, use insert operations.

Author: I'll be changing this to "collection"

> database. To insert a document, use insert operations.

Author: I'd like a second opinion on this from Nathan or Chris before implementing this change.

Insert operations consist of the ``insertOne()`` and ``insertMany()``

> methods. For both methods, the driver automatically generates a unique

Author: 1. I disagree. If the reader is reading the intro in order, they can see from the previous paragraph that you insert documents using an insert operation.
2. Usually, I link to the method definitions, but I forgot in this case and will add it in my updates.

> methods. For both methods, the driver automatically generates a unique

Reviewer 3: 1.  I believe there is a substantive difference between defining a term and stating what it consists of. For example, "A shirt consist of buttons and cloth," does not define what a shirt is.  Perhaps this issue could be circumvented if we do not use the term "insert operation" in the introduction? Potential rewrite: "To insert a document, use the ``insertOne()``method  or the ``insertMany()`` method." This edit is paired with deleting the second sentence on the first paragraph. I looked around the server and node insert documentation, and "insert operation" is not a commonly used term. The [Node Docs Insert Page ](https://docs.mongodb.com/drivers/node/current/fundamentals/crud/write-operations/insert/) does not use the term "insert operation." Could you please share your thoughts on how this edit would or would not benefit learners?

 
2. I believe we should use the same convention for how we link to API docs and discuss across the team. The convention we have inherited from @ccho-mongodb is to link to API docs at the end of a section. I am not saying whether this is good or bad, only that it is the convention. If you do not agree with this convention, we should meet as a team and make a decision. I will site the MongoDB Company value of "Commitment Over Consensus." We won't all agree on a style, but we should commit to the convention we pick and or inherit. I don't have a strong preference for either style, but I feel it is important is that we present our readers with a consistent structure.

> ``_id`` for documents unless specified. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``_id`` for documents unless the document specifies an ``_id``. 
```

In the past, I have been frustrated with documentation that references an action but does not give me a clear description of how to perform that action. When I here, "unless specified," my next thought is "how do I specify that?"

Insert Operations
-----------------

> insertOne()

Reviewer 3: Added this as point 27 to the [writing hints and tips doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1SxlDvx4MYKBE6-LYGp5i5uuHfY1ZUYYlhc6syEdta5M/edit).

> insertOne()

Reviewer 3: Added as point 29 to[ writing hints and tips.](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1SxlDvx4MYKBE6-LYGp5i5uuHfY1ZUYYlhc6syEdta5M/edit)

~~~~~~~~~~~

Use the ``insertOne()`` method to insert a single document. This method

> returns an ``InsertOneResult`` which tells us the ``insertedId`` of the

Author: I actually used ``insertedId`` as the literal term of what is within the result returned. For a single document, there's no index, but for multiple documents, there is.  And within each index, it stores the ``_id`` value as "value". Since I'm using this here as it's literal term, I think it should remain as ``insertedId``

> returns an ``InsertOneResult`` which tells us the ``insertedId`` of the

Reviewer 3: Is `insertedID` a class? If so could I be sent a link to its java doc page or its definition in the driver source code? 

After reviewing the [InsertOneResult](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-java-driver/blob/bb92fd238d060d1d9d675a1c436bfb4ad38cbbc0/driver-core/src/main/com/mongodb/client/result/InsertOneResult.java#L53) source code, I believe that `insertedId` is not a class, but rather a variable representing an `_id` referenced by the `getInsertedId()` method. Because of this, I believe that saying the "`insertedId` of a document" is incorrect, as `insertedId` is a variable holding a value representing the `_id` of an inserted document within the `InsertOneResult` class.  Because `insertedID` is a variable (outside of the [`InsertOneResult`](http://mongodb.github.io/mongo-java-driver/4.2/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/result/InsertOneResult.html?is-external=true#getInsertedId()) API as defined in the Java Doc), I believe the correct term is "id".

If you disagree with this assessment, could you please provide links to the Driver API documentation or Driver source code that provide evidence to support the stance that `insertedID` is the correct term?

document inserted.

The following example creates a document and inserts the document using
the ``insertOne()`` method: 

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Insert.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin insertOneExample
   :end-before: end insertOneExample

The output of the operation above should look similar to the following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

    AcknowledgedInsertOneResult{ insertedId = BsonInt32{value=1} }
    
For a runnable ``insertOne()`` example, see our :doc:`Insert a Document
</usage-examples/insertOne>` page. 

> 

Author: I personally am not a fan of having it per section or at the end. I understand that readers should be able to easily get more information, so I account for that with inline links as I mention them. If you feel that there are missing links, let me know and I'll add them accordingly.

   :start-after: begin insertManyExample
   :end-before: end insertManyExample

Your output should look something like this:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

>     IntertedIds: [ BsonInt32{ value=1 }, BsonInt32{ value=2 }]

Reviewer 4: 1) I think there's a typo here.
2) Could we print normal Java Integer values rather than BsonInt32? That way, the output could be more human-readable, e.g:
"Inserted documents with the following ids: [ 1, 2 ]"
